On the 2nd of August 2014, I swam continuously for approximately 6 minutes and 45 seconds; 10 lengths of a smallish pool. To many of you that may not seem remarkable, or even worth writing down, but for me it was a considerable achievement. This story explains the reasons why.

Since my youngest years I've been allergic to chlorine. Deemed unsafe to enter a public pool, I spent many hours as a young child sat on a hard aquamarine bench overlooking the six broad lanes of Queen Mary's Swimming Pool, the turgid and dense smell of forbidden chlorine welling up in my nostrils, momentarily distracted from my reading by the sounds of tiny hands splashing and the rubbery squeak of bathing shorts on the meandering slide. From above a pool looks very different - the humans of the six lanes are segregated not by creed or race but by speed and ability. I can picture the scene in my 7-year-old mind to this day: in the "Fast" lane closest to my viewpoint a tanned man swims a strong and steady crawl, in the "Intermediate" lanes a lady in a yellow cap rests her tired elbows on the shiny tiles, her body half out of the water, and in the "Slow" lanes furthest from me I can easily make out the deliberate actions of the elderly practising aerobics in the shallow end. I had been in this pool once, and did not enjoy the physical act of swimming alongside my much more capable peers, let alone the effects that short hour had on my tiny brittle body. For me, chlorine exposure induces a red rash that starts slowly, but then moves to encircle my body, like red ink blots diffusing across a vellum page. The antidote is a mystical expensive white cream, which has to be used daily for months until the little red dots and lines finally retreat from my body, the battle lost but the war still undecided.

My experiences as a child left me with an innate fear of the water. Normally I am an empirical human being rather than an emotional one, but try as I might the lonely fear of a large body of water - and especially losing one's depth, that visceral feeling of being displaced from a watery podium - remained. My mother will gladly tell you stories of my dread of any pool: once, as an infant on holiday in the balmy Caribbean, I was so scared of venturing into the middle of the hotel's pool that I dug my tiny nails deeper and deeper into the red inflatable parrot toy that had been brought to soothe my fears. My fervent pressure caused the parrot to fold in on itself, and eventually it punctured in a slow hiss - I grabbed for my mother again, leaving the deflated but still smiling parrot lapping limply on the rivulets from my struggle.

One friend from school came from a rich family - we were close friends but slowly drifted apart over the years. His 10th birthday party, as I recall, featured a swimming race for the group of kids invited in their basement pool. I was dropped off at their vast house bearing my body board, the latest attempt at improving my confidence in the water. Its garishly blue shiny plastic surface, emblazoned with a graphic of happy dolphins jumping effortlessly from the water, must have nearly dwarfed me. Entering the pool for the much-anticipated race, the host's mother looked down at me, "Do you really need that?", she asked derisively, pointing at the happy blue dolphins. I nodded, looking at my feet. "Well if you must, but hurry, we're just about to start". I lost all the races anyway.

Learning to swim in the sea, my only feasible option, was no easy task. As a boy growing up we holidayed frequently on Fuerteventura, an island of fantastic volcanic landscapes pitched rockily in the mid-Atlantic, named after the high winds that make it a mecca for watersports enthusiasts. On its beaches my mother and I tried to get my spindly body comfortable in salt water. We settled on breaststroke - to this day it is all I can manage. But try as I might in the shallow saltwater lagoons that formed next to the thin beaches as the tide retreated and the sun dipped further towards the horizon, my feeble attempts at emulating the movements of a frog - the master swimmers of the amphibian kingdom and certainly the blueprint for any breaststroke practitioner - were lacklustre at best. When I did manage to achieve positive buoyancy in the lagoons, we would rush hurriedly over to the beach and the endless charcoal sea in front of me, eager to transfer anything I had learnt in the waist-deep sandy pools. But I made no progress offshore, my efforts quickly terminated by large waves rolling in from the sand banks beyond, knocking me under into a tumbling world of grey and blue.

And so, after an interlude of more than five years, I found myself in an unique situation this summer, the summer of 2014. Carrying out field research from a remote location that had a chlorine-free swimming pool but little else to distract oneself left me with two months to do something once and for all about my pathetic swimming ability, as I rose into my third decade of existence. The process itself was oddly anticlimactic. I hated the first swim in the pool, but resolved to do it once a day if I could, as there was nothing else to do each evening before dining at my candlelit table for one. So every day I went, cleaning my body from the heat of the day with a swim before a pre-dinner shower - rather like the traditions of a Japanese *onsen* - getting used to the initial nervous response of submerging in a cold pool, learning to swim straight by fixating on a far object. The lengths slowly increased, 1 to 2, 2 to nearly 3. After each session I rested my tired body on the side of the pool that looked out over the Mozambique Channel, like the lady in the yellow cap in the "Intermediate" lane from all those years ago. My lengths continued to creep up, until I could swim for nearly three minutes without gasping for more air at the back of my throat. But the biggest break came one day far after sunset, as the wind blew onshore again, and I shut my mouth, arched my neck further towards the off-white mosaic floor, and breathed noisily through my nose, its path cutting just above the tiny waves. My body was more horizontal than vertical, more like a fish, more like a frog. Each stroke felt easier, more natural. I slipped through the water rather than rising up, snatching air, and falling down again. I more than doubled the previous day's distance. All it took was learning to put my head in the water.

I am still far from a strong swimmer, or even a confident one, but with four weeks of pool access remaining in this unique summer situation I feel I can, and will, improve slowly. My chlorine allergy isn't going to disappear, and I'll probably never experience the feeling of swimming alongside the common man at a communal pool. But for someone who's spent their life coming up with scores of excuses to not put my trunks on, and watched resentfully through steamy windows as classmates and adults alike glide through the water with a carefree ease I don't understand, being able to go for a swim with my friends sometime will be nice.